---
published: true
---
## What was my journey from studying pure math to becoming an applied mathematician?

When I was searching for colleges imagined I would study Economics and Internal Studies, preparing myself for a career in international business. At Kenyon and similar liberal arts colleges, I knew it would be possible to hone and balance my writing skills and gain experience in quantitative skills like mathematics and statistics. Even though I had expected to major in a humanities subject, I found myself most excited by my prospective maths courses and diligently planning how to fit in all of the maths classes that were calling my name. On February 14th, Just after beginning the second semester of my freshmen year, I declared my major in Math at a departmental-wide event -- "Declare Your Love for Math Day." On this day, we recorded a proof of our commitment to the Mathematics major; it was crafted together on the office hour whiteboards and perfectly corny and nerdy. By this time, I had clarified that I was interested in applying mathematical analysis to the humanities I learned about, such as urban planning, economics, and international politics.
	
I committed to dividing my time each semester between studying Maths, Percussion, Arabic, and a wide variety of humanities courses such as Classical Islam and Sociology. Kenyon's Mathematics major requirements were very adaptable to my diverse and developing interests. As I delved deeper into pure math, my deep appreciation for the art of proofs grew, but my desire for a career in Mathematics changed from "Pure Math" to "Applied Math." 

Looking back, my favorite math courses were the "Computational/Modeling/Applied" type, and many of the lessons I learned inform how I approach my career today. My experience culminated in a Senior Capstone in Bootstrapping Statistics link, even though most of my courses were in Pure maths. The 200-level Data Analysis course was the pivotal curriculum that introduced me to Bootstrap Methods and solidified my interest in Applied Maths. We explored assorted standard and emerging topics ranging from hypothesis testing, linear regression, multiple regression, and analysis of variance to non-parametric statistics. 

I took a course in Mathematical Modeling where we developed a fixed transit route using ArcGIS and linear algebra in a partnership with the local transit authority. The project was a unique opportunity to deliver a complete solution and repeatable analysis to a community partner. The transit authority utilized my team's transit route analysis to apply for a significant grant to expand their fleet successfully. Part of our success was due to abandoning an overly complicated analytical approach halfway through the course in favor of relying upon the provided functionality in ArcGIS to develop routes. We submitted a poster and video report to the Mathematical Association of America, and I thoroughly enjoyed traveling to Chicago and presenting the analysis at MathFest in 2017. 

Lastly, one of the most memorable parts of my maths study at Kenyon was completing an Independent Study in Partial Differential Equations with one of my closest peers. It was humbling and rewarding to dive into such a challenging subject with only one other student and a professor's guidance. We tackled the wave equation and applied it to a wildfire path simulation during this unique 2:1 student to teacher ratio experience.
	
In college was the first time I began to understand the study of maths as the study of mathematical reasoning rather than the memorization of mathematical equations. "Foundations," taught by Carol Schumacher, was my Bootcamp in reading, writing, and understanding the full rigor of mathematical reasoning. The course employs set-theory questions, student-led solutions, and seminar-setting presentations to build our confidence and clarity of reason. In Carol's words, "The central purpose of this course is to introduce you to careful use of language in the context of mathematical reasoning and proof. The course is meant to make you think about mathematics in a completely new way, in a more mature way. It should set you on the path to becoming a mathematical producer rather than a mathematical consumer." The key takeaway of the course is the skills to most effectively and efficiently communicate mathematical reasoning, the polar opposite of the "plug and chug" perception I had had of Math before this pivotal course. 

## What are the lessons I learned from studying pure maths that I use today?

My love of maths hasn't always been linear, especially since my academic pursuits were extremely challenging at times. When I enrolled in Linear Algebra my first semester, I struggled to apply what I had learned in Calculus 3 in high school. I chose not to repeat Calc 3, but by not experiencing Calc 3 in a college classroom setting with visualization tools available, I focused on the quickest path to the answer rather than mathematical intuition, proofs, or visualizations. Then, when it came to proofs in Linear Algebra, I struggled with where even to start! It wasn't until I took Foundations that I broke through the proof-writing barrier and improved.
    
Moreover, in my second year, I challenged myself to take the depth requirement and struggled to keep pace with my third and fourth-year peers in the 400-level Real Analysis course. I persevered, and with tremendous aid and attention from my professor at the time, I skirted past with a C. I am still so proud of myself for finishing Real Analysis, even though that was my lowest letter grade in a single course throughout all of college.
    
The complexity of these courses, the exertion to keep pace with my peers, and the hurdle of committing mathematical concepts to my memory helped shape the following five skills I have found still essential to my work as Cyber Risk Quantification Consultant:
    
**1) Define the Problem and the Question First:** In reliable and precise terms, have clear expectations with all stakeholders about what you are trying to analyze, solve, or research. Developing a transparent understanding of the problem or question at hand enables efficient information sharing, stakeholder alignment, and replicating the analysis.

**2) Explicitly Document and Validate Your Assumptions:** The historical context of the problem always matters when trying to find a solution or test a hypothesis. It is valuable not to assume others will know what you know and instead document and validate assumptions that feed into defining the problem, data, or analytical model chosen. This process enables stakeholders to have a deeper understanding and higher confidence in results. Clarifying assumptions becomes even more necessary in an industry environment where many stakeholders bring diverse expertise to a project. Some examples of the types of questions I ask myself while analyzing an applied math problem for undocumented or unvalidated assumptions include:
- Are key contextual facts included in the problem scope?
- Are industry-specific terms defined?
- Why this analytical model?
- Are there technical or data-oriented contextual facts or decisions that influenced the analytical model or results?

**3) Accept and Balance Constraints:** As a mathematician, it can be easy to get caught up in the pursuit of perfection. This type of perfectionism is excellent for writing a novel proof but can also derail or delay an industry project when "perfection is the enemy of done." Often decent results and then iteratively maturing the hypothesis, inputs, or analysis is better than initially seeking the perfect model or problem statement. Types of Constraints could include:
- Timeline for Expected Solution Implementation
- Data and Resource Availability
- The Precision of Analysis and Results
- Accuracy of Analysis and Results
- Reliability or Consistency of Analysis and Results
- My Intellectual & Physical Energy

**4) Solve Problems in Logical Steps:** Breaking down an analysis project into the essential steps ensures that stakeholders have clear expectations of what we want to accomplish and that, as the analyst, I have clear expectations for myself. I appreciate drawing upon the "Agile" delivery process for applied maths projects. Understanding the steps of solving a problem ensures I am accountable to a reasonable delivery schedule, reduces the amount of "surprise" delays, and creates a more efficient workflow.

**5) Consider the Trivial or Obvious Case for Teaching Purposes:** The best way to teach and share knowledge is often by starting with a basic application rather than the exceptions or complications. As a mathematician, it is my goal to push the limits of what mathematical analysis can provide and educate my peers to have an intuitive understanding of the analysis and results. Not everyone wants to be in the weeds of R and python, which is OK; part of my responsibility is ensuring that all stakeholders understand the math intuitively and how it applies to their work.

## How does all of this relate to Cyber Risk Management? 

I work with assorted stakeholders from security product SMEs to cyber program owners to provide strategic recommendations about managing limited resources to mitigate cyber risks. We work with complex incoming threat and monitoring data, control data, and people and process-oriented survey data in Risk Quantification. The analysis I deliver must be somewhat adaptable, moderately precise, and very reliable. I must blend a variety of industry advice and my skills in applied maths to advise the best approach for a specific enterprise to measure their cyber risk. 

Some of the tools we use to define the standards for risk analysis are the National Institute of Science and Technology's (NIST) Cyber Security Framework (CSF) and Risk Management Framework (RMF). Central to the RMF is to frame the risk you want to analyze; without clearly defining the risk the analysis measures, you cannot reasonably measure a given company's exposure to the risk.

My role is to apply mathematical reasoning to cyber risk quantification by clearly defining and testing a hypothesis of the organization's cyber risk exposure using knowledge learned over time. My first step is always to elicit and document the stakeholder needs for the analysis results; this process enables developing an understanding of the problem my analysis should solve and why solving the problem is a strategic priority for cyber leaders. It is integral to clearly define assumptions in risk analysis, like in an applied math project, because all stakeholders need to have a rigorous and precise common understanding of the risk analysis process to benefit from and trust in the results. Like with mathematical proofs, it is essential to ground analysis in these axioms of truth and the identified problem to drive the research iteratively towards the desired results.

Cyber Risk is a growing threat to both industry and consumers and provides a plethora of real-world data to filter through the lens of applied maths. While I continue to grow in place and prepare for an international move with my family, I am focused on researching and employing non-parametric statistical methods to the question of cyber risk quantification. The data I encounter daily in Cybersecurity is not Normal, not even unimodal, or the characteristics of the population are not known; this makes quantifying cyber risk a non-parametric problem in many cases. 

I recently reached the milestone of working as an applied mathematician for five years, and my interests are again remolding. In the future, I am looking forward to learning more about the history of mathematics, ancient proofs of geometry, and indigenous mathematics. My passion is leaning more towards ethnomathematics, the study of mathematics in culture, such as documenting the diversity of naming and representation of numbers and counting systems. I'm excited about how much math there still is to learn, I am rewarded every day for following my intuition to study, teach, and visualize math, and I plan to continue to write about and share my love of math as long as I can.
